[Music]
Heat. Heat.
Hey, hey, hey.
[Music]
Hey everybody, how's it going? Thanks
for joining me this afternoon. I've got
a great stream with a great guest that I
think you're really going to enjoy. Nick
Land is somebody who has done a lot of
amazing work that I've been really
fascinated with and I'm happy to finally
have him on the show to talk talk about
it. So Nick, thank you so much for
coming on. Oh, thank you. I'm looking
forward to it. Absolutely. And I should
let people know we are recording this uh
early because of the time difference. So
if you have a question, unfortunately we
won't be able to do any live questions
today. Sorry about that. Uh but Nick, I
just wanted to start out by saying, you
know, NRX was obviously a political uh
event, a a collection of political
theory that was occurring uh mainly on
message boards in the dark corners of
the internet. Not many people who
weren't extremely online had any idea
that this was going on. Now JD Vance
knows who Curtis Yarvin is, has read
Curtis Yarvin. Many people at the White
House are now very familiar with a lot
of this work and that means they
probably are also familiar with what
you're talking about and it's probably
had an influence on what is now going on
even in many parts of the US government.
Is that ever strange to you that this
little kind of niche political theory uh
on the internet has now exploded into
the mainstream?
Um
there's a lot of strangeness around it
for sure. I mean, I maybe it's worth
just stepping back a little bit and
saying that
I don't think NRX was it it's uh you
know what they OPSSE was not massively
high in my appearance. So I I might have
been like out of those conversations
happening on Signal and super secure
channels or whatever, but from my
perspective it was happening on blogs in
the public domain, you know, e easily
accessible
um
for sure niche, but but but definitely
public. And so even though there was
definitely an atmosphere of extreme
uh cultural repression, you know, I
think that the sort of mindset was very
um
almost sort of samistat kind of
mentality.
It was in fact,
you know, I don't think our blo blogs
were often taken down. Like I didn't
really have that problem. Um, obviously
mold the moldbug blog which was the the
kind of foundation of the whole thing
was just up. Um,
so it's so I totally agree it's gone
from niche to being much more
mainstream, but I don't think that's
because it was really hidden. It was
because people maybe weren't paying
attention to it. Yeah, I should say I
didn't mean it was secret. I meant that
it was just so underground. It didn't
get a lot of mainstream attention. But
one of the things that I loved about it,
one of the things that captivated me and
I think still does was that it did feel
like something important was happening
in real time. You know, there there was
uh there was this public conversation
about something important that just
didn't take place very often. We're
usually arguing minutia of some bill
somewhere as if that's really going to
matter. And so the fact that this was
kind of a public project that anyone
could jump into and in many cases did a
lot of people who otherwise had no
experience in political theory, no real
standing in, you know, in in the
intelligencia suddenly became people who
were elevated to the level of serious
thinkers simply because of their
participation in that realm.
Yes, I do think it was
important in that respect. Like uh it
obviously then spilled onto Twitter
under the Jack Dorsey massively
suppressive Twitter, but still it was
always going up to the wire on that and
um
lots of kind of blog activity, lots of
commentary. Um, so I think it opened up
a kind of function of the internet that
maybe we haven't really seen before or
at least
um
the notion of the internet as a root
around of
established
uh cultural centers of authority I think
was really put into practice by Neo
Reaction in a in a very strong and I
think probably
influential way.
Yeah, it really was. You know, we we've
seen the internet become this thing that
allowed you to kind of route around the
cathedral to, you know, create a
authority outside of it. And we've seen
that on many different levels culturally
and all these others, but I don't think
we had seen it academically in this
manner. And so I think that was kind of
the the most interesting thing about
that is there was suddenly a place a
nexus for people who maybe would not
have otherwise made it through
university system or would not have been
elevated inside of it would have been
taken seriously by major publishers
those kind of things but now there was a
place for them to actually develop these
theories and spread them in a meaningful
way and I like I said I just always
thought that was a very interesting
thing about what was going on with the
NRX movement. Yes, I think everyone
involved definitely had a sense of that.
Um, oh, sorry. Go ahead. Well, I was
just going to say, you know, the other
side of this, like how so how does this
relate to where we are now?
And I think there's quite a lot of
complexity to that or or amusement or
however one is going to look at it
because
the the basic NRX
paradigm for government. It was it was
born out of I think total despair that
started probably I I get the sense maybe
you know the absolute horror of the Bush
and Obama administrations. people just
really thought
everything was just on this accelerating
downward slope. Uh there was they really
given up on anything good coming out of
these uh western political systems.
Um, and
that was I mean that there was something
sort of liberating about that because
people just got out of a certain kind of
level of political engagement into this
much more
pure level of speculative intellectual
activity about it. Um but but the basic
paradigm for government was what coming
out of the moldbug blog was called
patchwork neocalism
and you know it's an interesting
term and it has these two parts to it
and the neocamalism side which is based
it was a typical sort of mold bug I'll
say mold bug when we're talking about
this phase rather than yin which we can
move on to later. Um,
and yes, so it's a typical mold bug uh
lexical innovation in the sense it's
reaching back to kind of arcane
governance structures of
of Prussia in the like 18th century. Um
um and maybe that neocamealism side
sort of transitions into what we're
seeing Yavvin doing now and what the
media
thinks he's all about and maybe he
thinks he was always all about. But the
patchwork side and the two things were
just at the same governance model uh
seen in different aspects which is that
large nation states have failed. They're
going to start breaking up. There's a
set of um
technological innovations coming down
the the pipeline that's going to allow
deterrence and micro governance and much
smaller units of uh of geopolitical
organization to to protect themselves
and and to flourish. I mean that was
what we were all talking about. And I
don't see that we've got any closer to
that in any obvious way by recent
developments. I mean, it seems to me
it's more that those those things have
been put in the freezer temporarily at
least. I mean, it's I I don't see anyone
much talking about them. I I certainly
don't think I mean the whole Trump
administration geopolitical stance is
about
increasing territorial aggregation. I
mean, I don't know what level of
seriousness we're talking about, but
certainly, you know, Greenland, Canada,
reopening the Great Northern Frontier,
all of that kind of, you know, rhetoric,
what, however one takes it, is the
absolute opposite really of a kind of
neo-reactionary mode of
discussion of of geopolitics. So, I
think there's something a little bit
ironic about the fact that lots of
people and lots of mainstream media
outlets are trying to grab on the sort
of NRX legacy and say, "Hey, this is
somehow explaining
where we are now or what's going on." I
mean, it seems to me, at least in that
respect, a huge stretch to do that. Um,
and
well, I mean, yeah, maybe I should sort
of just break things up into manageable
chunks and and not see immediately into
a into a follow on that. Yeah. No, I'm
I'm glad that you brought that up
because I'm actually going that was my
plan was to dive deeper into some of
that. And I've actually talked to Curtis
about uh the fact that he's dialed down
the patchwork stuff uh as well. And to,
you know, his response was me is, "Oh,
don't worry, that's coming." Uh, so I
don't know if he's just making that less
of an emphasis. He's like focusing on
the the the form of governance first and
then scaling it down. I I'm not sure.
Or, you know, maybe it's just Curtis
talking. I'm not sure, but I've
mentioned the same thing to him. So,
actually, let's uh let's kind of start
at the beginning because I want to get
to to exactly what you're talking about
here. But first, I wanted to pick your
brain about the intersection of your
work and uh kind of the managerial
revolution. Uh I I remember asking you
on Twitter trying to get a grasp on kind
of how these things interact and you
said that in a way the managerial
revolution is uh a human security system
trying to contain uh capital as it you
know grows and tries to separate itself
from human control. And I just wonder if
you could expound on that because I
think a lot of people look at the
managerial revolution and they say, "Oh,
no, this is people becoming less human.
Uh this is, you know, is is this really
just people, you know, uh governments
trying to make their people uh less
human in a sense, but in a way that will
allow them to get a wider control on
what's happening with capital." What is
your take with that interaction?
Um
well I think you know may maybe I'm sort
of panning out a bit wide for your
question and we'll have to sort of close
in on it a little bit but you know
within the framework of the broad
neoreactionary
conversation that we were just talking
about. I think that one of the
stereotypes about that that is right is
that it was a kind of um
it was coming out of a disillusioned
liberalism.
Uh I was going to say libertarianism but
actually more widely liberalism. I mean
it's like it's definitely an event
I think in the liberal tradition. It was
a kind of a liberalism of profound
despair.
And I think a lot of the energy that fed
into it was very similar to
uh what you see in the kind of paleo
libertarian
um writers of the like 30s and 40s, you
know, in in terms of a kind of absolute
horror at what is happening to the
managerialization
of American society.
you know, at the most
problematic perhaps, you know, at the
level of government. But obviously,
you know,
this very disturbing
uh
amalgamation happening between
government bureaucracies and businesses.
And you know, we've only seen that kind
of continually escalate and the
switching of personnel and of kind of
management philosophies and of wider
philosophies.
A a lot of the problem that people have
obviously with the whole woke
phenomenon was that it was exactly that.
It was traffic backwards and forwards
between kind of corporate
bureaucracies and government
bureaucracies as if they were
serious breaking up a little bit there.
Unfortunately,
yes, I I saw that glitching out. I don't
know what we lost. Uh not much. I think
you're just talking about the personnel
moving between uh different aspects of
the regime and how that was part of the
woke phenomenon.
Yeah. So I was just really trying to say
that this anti-managerialism
uh you know has has legs or whatever.
It's kind of from the point at which the
liberal tradition in Anglophone
societies becomes increasingly desperate
and you know it's uh analysis of what's
going wrong is the fact that there is
this kind of government corporate
fusional managerial culture that's just
completely taking over and um so I don't
think there's anything very new about
Um,
and it I mean I think we're probably
going to be doing some looping around
because it connects in a complex way
with Mulbug and Lady Yavin's writings
because the absolutely horrific figure
is obviously FDR.
um you know lots of people take it back
to Lincoln or whatever and Wilson is not
popular but if there's a single figure
who represents the kind of collapse of a
particular notion of America as a a kind
of individualist liberal entrepreneurial
capitalist society and into this new
managerial model that by the time it
really takes off in the 1960s. It
produces all the things now creating our
cultural wars and and our underlying
uh political philosophy disputes. Um so
yeah, that's that's the FDR
administration for sure. Um, and that
moment,
um,
that moment is something that
even Moldbug and much more emphatically
Yavin seems to celebrate in a in a way
that's very paradoxical. I mean, I think
if you're really on inside baseball in
this, that is
really strange, actually. Mhm. Um and
I mean you can say oh he wants he wants
maybe Donald Trump to be to behave like
FDI. I mean I think he's kind of upfront
about that but it's
yes I mean on this managerialism
question. So actually um sorry I'm let
me get let you get a word in edge res
and well recognize I've totally included
your actual question which I will now I
will now get back to after I've let you
get a word in edge there. Yeah. Oh no
problem. You're you're just you're
you're you're intent on answering the
question about Jarvin's uh abandonment
of patchwork which which I absolutely
want to get into. But yeah the main it's
definitely related. It's definitely
related. Absolutely. Um yeah. So your
question is about what's the
relationship managerialism and humanism?
Yes.
Is that right? Yeah. Ba basic basically
why why are we seeing this reaction? Is
is is it an attempt to widen the human
ability to contain capital? Is that is
do you think that's the uh the main
thrust of why this revolution has taken
place and and become so dominant or what
what is that relationship do you think?
Um
well my deep sense of this is that
um
and in fact this is in a way continuous
or substantially continuous with the
with the work of these crazy French
waspers Durs and Guari
um that
human society
has a an instinctive
terror and aversion to capitalism.
You know, even in the even before
capitalism exists, well, capitalism is
just this virtual
threat.
um they draw on the work of this French
um anthropologist and ethnographer
called Pierre Claster who has a I I
guess people think it's a strange but I
find it a very appealing and interesting
theory that it's a you can actually
model all human societies as being
forms of uh security preemptive security
against the emergence of capitalism.
you know, and I think this is really
strong
in uh China, you know, if you're
studying the history of China, like the
the great phenomenon here is that as
Markx and many other people have said, I
think maybe Francis Bacon might even
have said it first,
China invented all the, you know, Marxes
again or is it Bacon's four great
inventions of modernity, you know, the
magnetic compass, printing, paper and
gunpowder are all are all Chinese
inventions.
Mark says, "Look, capitalism with
equipped with that, it cap capitalism is
able to blow up the world." You know,
it's able to completely uh revolutionize
traditional society, set us on this kind
of crazy exponential curve into the
unknown that we've been on for 500
years. Um, and yet China, that didn't
happen in China, you know, it when it
had gunpowder in battle and it was used
for kind of basically fireworks, you
know, as a sort of psychological thing
to sort of try and discombobulate the
enemy. Um,
paper, sure, it used printing.
I think that the first sort of very
large scale printing was done by the
Buddhists in China and was used to sort
of disseminate Buddhist literature and
and indeed Buddhism became a Chinese
religion after having started off as an
Indian religion I guess because of that.
Um, but it certainly didn't do any of
the stuff that we would recognize from
the Protestant Reformation in Europe of
using printing again as this way of just
putting a a kind of lever into the
traditional the onion regime and and
start push pulling it apart. Um, and the
same
oceanic navigation.
Um, you know, the Chinese are very proud
of Jung-H, who's not of course
ethnically Chinese and his expeditions,
which were amazing on ships that were so
much more impressive than anything the
West came up with maybe till like the
19th century. Um, but those expeditions
were weirdly Chinese. Like they were
about trying to hunt down some pretender
to the imperial lineage. Uh, they
weren't colonial. The Chinese were not
setting up
you know, they weren't exporting their
population or setting up camps or
anything like this around the world. You
know, some sort of tributary relations
maybe were being involved. And then in
the Ming Ming dynasty um in the in the
17th century um
early 17th century the the oceanic
navigation was um criminalized
to the extent that sailing beyond sight
of the shore was a capital offense and
even villages and settlements on the
Chinese coast that were like on the sea
I think there was some distance 10 miles
or something were were dismantled and
the population was not allowed to be uh
occupying these coastal territories. Um
so you have to say well what's going
what's going on there? like um it seems
to be showing this incredible sort of
innate
resistance
that's deeply baked into these Chinese
social and political structures that are
able to totally withstand the threat of
these of these innovations coming
together and producing this takeoff of
the kind that we see in the European
context.
Um,
so yes, this is where I'm so might be
hard to see, but this is supposed to go
into the managerialism question. You
know that this is what I think
managerialism in the west
can be understood as a kind of
artificial China. I mean it's a it's the
way that our societies
um also try to get some
uh grip on these explosive
territories. Um sorry not territories
trajectories. Um
and I think this is most clearly seen
around AI which is the most intense zone
of all of this. It's the thing that
capitalism has been heading to right
from the start. Um, and
managerialism, I think, in that can
clearly be seen as an attempt to put
some kind of lid on this
extremely whoops extremely dangerous
explosive phenomenon.
Now, China of course. So, yes, when the
human I mean,
sorry, go ahead. I know we have some lag
there. I thought you Yeah, we have some
lag. Say again. Sorry.
Well, I was just going to I was just
going to ask China uh obviously did
eventually have a communist revolution
and at least is still in theory
communist today. What do you you know
for a culture that was so resistant to
modernity up to that point uh how does
that factor into your explanation?
Well, I think you know the way I would
run this forward is that very
uh against massive resistance.
China did eventually start
uh
with a lot of I mean there's a lot of
things feeding into this foreign
influence being huge and also the
Chinese perception of the threat of
foreign power with the same thing that
had made the Japanese earlier
jump forward into the Maji restoration
um
in the early late 19th early 20th
century
you get
capitalistic phenomena beginning to
definitely manifest themselves in in
China.
Um
I would see sorry
I would see the communist revolution as
a kind of uh in some way anti-modernist
reaction. I mean, I think it's like
it's certainly
put the lid on these things
until we get sorry
until we get Xiinping.
No, sorry, God. Until we get Dang
Xiaoing,
you know, that China puts itself back in
the in the in the deep freeze as far as
modernization is concerned. I mean um
you know its goals are all missed. Total
social calamities on a scale that are
even hard to understand.
Um incredible technological backwardness
with a few like niche zones of of of
advance. I mean, no one's very scared of
China
before,
you know, at that time. It's like it's
there's a lot of people.
Um, but there's it's not you compare
perceptions, Western perceptions of the
Soviet Union and of China, it's like the
Soviet Union was obviously the
competitive modernizing society and
China didn't look like that at all.
Um
and now where obviously things have
turned around hugely because we have now
had some kind
of extreme capitalistic social
development in China starting in the
early 1980s.
Um
so yeah that's how I would history.
Uh Alexander Dugan had talked about uh
the reason that you see communist
revolutions in the third world where
they're not supposed to exist. That's
not the way that Marxism is actually
supposed to develop. He said the reason
that you see that is basically it's
countries that are desperately trying to
modernize without western control. So
they're they were trying to become
modern without western influence. And
really communism just becomes the excuse
to centralize, create a managerial
apparatus and accelerate development.
It's not so much ideology as it is a
attempt to to create a wall between you
and the western influence as you
modernized and able to uh compete with
them. Do you do you feel like there's
some accuracy there? Yes, I think
there's a lot of accuracy there. Um but
it's but it's definitely so there tends
to not be any clear line between
nationalism and Marxism, you know,
implementing of Marxism Leninism in
those situations. Um, and I can totally
see the nationalist imperative is is
huge. But at the same time,
at least initially, at least well, you
know, if we're talking about the period
just post war
and as I say up to maybe the late '7s
everywhere
there really was a belief in these
countries among at least these parties,
these regimes that there was a socialist
model of development. So it's I mean it
certainly was in part keeping the west
out that was seen as being seamlessly
um integrated with actually having a
domestic socialist economy that would
downplay the role of markets that would
that have direct state control of almost
all industrial activity. uh massive
centralized planning and um that sort of
had to play itself out to the point of
failure. Um and I guess the failure was
sort of synchronized everywhere, even in
the Soviet Union. like it was because
the Soviet Union wasn't seen to be
spectacularly
failing until the 1970s
that these the rest of the world thought
there was something here that they could
emulate.
So let's get back to uh the the question
of scale and patchwork because uh as you
pointed out we now have a lot of people
who are starting to look at some of NRX
and taking it seriously but Curtis's
focus has most assuredly been really on
uh the you Donald Trump becoming you
know the monarch that that that's really
been uh the push that he's had. And even
though we see what should be a lot of
opportunities, I think to recognize that
uh large scale systems, large
bureaucracies, large uh continent
spanning or you know world spanning
empires, these things are starting to
come apart. We're seeing all of the
failures you can't get on an airline uh
supply chains, all these things that are
stretched so thin uh due to the attempt
to scale across the globe. Uh these
things are starting to become a problem.
you're seeing a little bit with Donald
Trump talking about reshoring uh you
know recognizing that actually you can't
be entirely dependent on these global
trade networks and these kind of things
uh but ultimately no one is talking
about patchwork no one is talking about
scaling things down we're not we're not
doing a thousand likensteines here and
so what do you think about that what why
aren't we hearing that discussion about
you know Singapore and city states and
that kind of thing
Um,
well, I don't know. I think that's a
that's a really interesting question and
there's lots of little bits that all
seem a bit empirical and not very
impressive as a sort of at a high level
of theoretical apprehension. I mean, one
element that I would think has to be on
the table there is what's happened to
Hong Kong. you know, like Hong Kong and
Singapore were the two
great lamps I think of this kind of
patchwork vision. It's like why can't we
be more like them? And so one of them
has been taken off the table really.
Like it's under, you know, if you visit
Hong Kong now, it's
um, you know, it seems like a kind of
second tier Chinese city.
um but with a cost of living three times
as high as on the mainland. It's like
it's completely it's not a beacon of any
kind to anyone now. Um and it was always
the more liberal of those two. I mean
between Singapore and Hong Kong, Hong
Kong really was
the greatest example of less aair
hyperliberal
economics in action that the world has
ever seen. And so its removal from the
equation is like big in that respect.
Like that not being there is is
definitely one huge thing.
But I think that more important
is that
I mean to really simplify it a lot is
that Trump has proven to be a political
genius
and has done a kind of populist rightism
that I don't think anyone
sort of certainly in the kind of high
NRX years.
Imagine being remotely possible. Um it
just seemed like he was against so much
like you know the whole system of
cultural production was just
monolithically
against him. Uh obviously that this
category of the cathedral was basically
innovated by mold bug to describe that.
Um and that
uh that cultural machine was it wasn't
just that that was all in enemy hands
but that was seen as being the dominant
social instance you know so that all
power in the classic Mug model runs
downhill from Harvard um um
and yet somehow somehow that lost
um you know through an incredible series
of events really um and I think that
that's I don't think people have begun
to
really
fully adjust to that yet what that means
like um we're in a new world um and it
doesn't have good
ctography I mean it's partly because of
this thing that it's impossible to know
what Trump is really serious I mean um
you know everyone's I think well either
outraged or entertained by his whole
like great white north policy.
No one knows how serious he is about any
of it. I mean whether it's just absolute
casual humorous trolling of your
northern neighbors or whether there's
some vision there and more or less
explicit. No, I don't think anyone knows
that. You know, I'm not even sure the
people right around Donald Trump. I'm
not even sure if Donald Trump knows
that. So, it makes it very hard to
really ask serious questions about where
we are when it's so difficult to tell
what is serious and what's just trolling
and what the project is here, you know.
Um, so again, I think I probably
wandered a lot off what your actual
question. No, it's okay. I I think
that's exactly right. Trump has this
distortion field around him that makes
him very difficult for the cathedral to
pin down and control. It also makes it
very difficult to analyze where he's
going because, you know, that that's the
whole point. Uh, we just saw Elon Musk
obviously recently have quite the crash
out in relationship with Trump. Now, for
a moment, it looked like this was kind
of going to be the golden uh synthesis,
right? Because we were going to get the
populist energy of the right, but we
were going to get the, you know, the
technological innovation, uh, reaching
for the stars with someone like Musk,
and together this was going to forge
some kind of alliance. I I think even
originally when, uh, you know, you and
Spandrel were writing about NRX, there
was always this tension between uh, kind
of more of the throne and alter, the
nationalist guys, and then the, uh, the
tech optimists. And uh that that was
always the problem is trying to keep all
of these guys in the same room. Uh and
we kind of saw the same thing unfold on
the national stage in the United States
with this crash out. Uh so it did we
just see the defeat of the tech optim
optimist by the nationalists and the
throne of alter guys? Like why do you
think that that dynamic played out the
way that it did?
I think it's quite mysterious. I I
because
no one could possibly have doubted that
there was going to be huge tension
between these two polls.
Um
but on the other hand, it had seemed
that both sides saw how important this
relation was
and the whole sort of obviously the Doge
thing of like let's bring some of this
like
business competence into the process of
actually disinstalling large chunks of
government. I mean uh that was something
I think that was very exciting to a lot
of people.
um and looked like it was designed to be
the kind of strategic cement that would
hold these guys together. So
in some ways it was to me at least it's
a bit surprising that you know Musk
would really like storm out of the room
quite so melodramatically.
Um,
and if I if I was asked to predict, I
mean, I sort of feel
I sort of feel it can't just be over
like that. And and I might even say, you
know, come with my particular
predictions. I sort of feel a bit bleak
for what we're looking at over the next
few years. if it really is the case that
that
is over even as an ambition to hold
those two things together like um I mean
it's obviously the case that Musk
had to compromise on things you know
that H1B issue which was his previous
crash out uh clearly like you just be
realistic Elon like that's you you've
got to make concessions to the political
reality of things and I would say
also this budget question I mean I agree
with Musk that it's absolutely horrific
what has happened American government
finances is absolute horror story you
know it's can't be sustainable
um and it's basically
it's basically funneling
national resources into the hands of
people who've been a disaster. Like I
think we'll maybe get to this because
it's very tied up with the whole trade
thing. I mean it's basically saying
that American
bond
holding institutions are the real core
of national power. You know what I mean?
And it's like we we're going to every
year add trillions of dollars to their
center of gravity and and basically
America is just this kind of
satellite of this vast
financial apparatus based on this global
bond holding.
Um, so
surely like you know I understand the
populism on Trump's side means that he's
not going to do the kind of savage axe
wielding that no doubt Musk would like
to see. But he must have this he must at
least share some of this sense that you
know remodeling America
what's at stake in the regime that was
just overthrown
must require
a massive reconstruction of American
finance and and the way finance works in
American public life
or maybe you think I'm being optimistic
about that. No, I I I've seen Elon
actually uh was on Twitter apologizing
for his previous post and that kind of
thing. So So hopefully at some point he
you know they are able to kind of put
that team back together. But I think
this is why Jarvin is ultimately pushing
the consolidation of power and the
removal of politics end of the formula
first because I think he's recognizing
from what happened with Elon there that
you're just seeing that as long as
there's a democratic process as long as
we're still doing democratic politics,
you're never going to actually be able
to institute the type of changes that
you're talking about. And Elon just
doesn't understand that. You know,
coming in from the position he's in, he
just wants to get things done. He's just
channeling all of his autism into his
pet projects. And that's the kind of
thing you need when you're doing a
corporation and you don't have this
immediate accountability to voters or
public opinion. But if you do, you
simply can't operate in that way. And he
just doesn't understand that. So I think
that's again why Jarvin is focusing on
that because until you remove that
connection, until you free the uh the
CEO king to actually rule uh without
that input, you're never going to see
the the type of changes that Elon and
and guys like Yarvin are ultimately
hoping uh to to have come about. Yes. I
mean, I think that they might need
pulling apart a little bit in the sense
I mean, we can get to this, you know, in
a in a moment, but I mean, Yarvin has
some pretty wild ideas about the role of
finance and in government. Um
um but for Elon I think that there's a
you know what I'm seeing about this is
as I said I could go back probably you
could try and stretch it right but to
just start from like 20s and 30s and
paleo libertarianism and um
uh this whole what has happened is like
you know hardcore the hardcore liberal
tradition
just went through all the stages of
grief, you know, and by the time it's at
NRX,
it's it's basically like the kind of
things that we would have to see in
order for any of any of these liberal
ideas to have a chance of working are
extremely radical. Um, and obviously
Peter Teal's
very famous remark that he'd ceased to
consider
democracy and freedom to be compatible,
I think was a kind of echoing theme
that, you know,
Neo action was very consistently
deeply skeptical about democracy. and it
was deeply skeptical about democracy. I
think in part because de democracy
seemed to be the gravedigger
of the entire
liberal tradition. You know, it was like
even if it was in a very large part
post-liberal and post-lbertarian, I
mean, figures like Hop, people like, you
know, the these very the right
libertarian
characters I think were very
influential. Um
and
and you know have the murdering
murdering liberalism was basically the
the kind of crime. You know that was the
the bodies in the basement that
underpinned a lot of what the erection
was really about. you know that this
this system had basically
killed
uh the most valuable part of the
anglophone tradition and we were now in
the ruins you know and so what was going
to happen about it and so the weird
thing about the let's say the Elon crash
out is that it's completely oblivious to
that whole process you know what I mean
it's like it's like he hasn't
followed at all anything that has
happened in the, you know, the discourse
of the libertarian right in America over
the last century.
And he's just
coming in and saying, "Oh, we can, you
know, why can't we have libertarianism?
We've got we've got a friendly president
now." I mean the just shocking naivity,
the shocking lack of
uh entrenched functional
foundational despair in it is just the
thing that is amazing to me. Um,
and you know,
I I I think that whatever process of
recovery he's going to go through, some
of it has to be like dealing with that
because it's not
it's not going to work for him to sort
of have this notion that there's there's
a kind of libertarian option just
sitting there to be picked up if you
just have some
slight political will in a democratic
context.
One of the things that the
administration has focused on and
obviously I think pretty much all
governments are focusing on at this
point as you mentioned is AI. Uh you've
obviously written quite a bit about this
and uh I'm wondering what you think
about where we are with artificial
intelligence. Obviously there's a lot of
AI safety, a lot of desire to control uh
where AI is going to go. We're already
seeing that AI is as you kind of
predicted uh very good at uh
circumventing those uh those controls
and we'll probably only get better at
it. Uh I the thing that I'm observing
the most and this probably is just me
being like a former high school teacher.
Uh the thing I'm observing most is the
way that it's immediately eroding
people's ability to remember uh anything
or find the need to uh retain any
information on their own. It's all just
whatever the AI is regurgitating back to
me, whatever it's summarizing. Uh, at
the moment, I I think most people are uh
who aren't worried about AI are just
saying, "Oh, well, that's all it's ever
going to do." You know, LLMs are just
going to keep spitting back whatever you
throw at them. We're never going to see
any kind of singularity type moment.
But, uh, what do you think about the
state of AI and the way that governments
are approaching AI at the moment in this
in this race? They all seem to know that
they need it even though they don't
quite understand what it is about it
that they need. Yeah. I mean, I'm
definitely on the kind of um
excited end of the AI spectrum in the
sense like, you know, if if at one end
there's people saying, "Oh, it's never
going to amount to anything or it's
going to slow down or we run some scurve
that it's going to platter." I mean,
that's I'm up the other end to that. I
think it's just absolutely out of the
box. taking off in an incredible way.
Its performance is already
extraordinary. Um, it's going to get
more extraordinary at an exponential
rate. And I think AI safety
is dead. I mean, I don't think there's
any plausible. It's for one thing, it's
just too slow. I mean, I've followed the
AI safety kind of arguments at least out
of the corner of my eye or whatever for
like
maybe two decades now. And it's not
if there's if there is any actual
progress happening, it's at such a
snail's pace that there's not any chance
it can keep up. I mean it just simply is
completely uh outpaced.
And that's not the only problem. You
know the other obviously huge thing is
that as you say it's now become
understood everywhere as being the
strategic industry. So I mean Europe I
think has just dropped out. So they
don't they've just given up. Um, but
between America and China,
both sides think that
all their long-term, medium-term, not
even some perhaps quite short-term
geopolitical prospects are totally tied
up with this technology and their
relative position in this technology.
and and that alone means that nothing's
going to be done to to impede it with
any seriousness.
Um
so yes I think it's of all the things
it's the most difficult one to talk
about because we
we are I think already touching on a
genuine singularity an event horizon and
it's you know what's beyond it is just
beyond our capacity to even comprehend
and so
it's like I think described as a wall
across the future Um
but but it's but it's huge and it dwarfs
all these other things. I mean you know
so all our kind of political and
whatever
machinations are
relatively trivial I think in this
context.
Do you think that there is a possibility
that AI's capacity could ultimately
allow for smaller patchwork style
governments? they would unload a lot of
the uh advantages of scale and the needs
for bureaucracy and these kind of things
or do you think it will actually just
more empower the larger governments?
They'll be the ones that'll be able to
leverage it more or will it will allow
for some smaller scale states to emerge
and be competitive because of the
advantages AI could bring.
Um, it's just hard for me to avoid
wishful thinking because I so clearly
know which of those sides I want to
take. You know, again, like to Peter
Teal at a certain point seemed to be
utterly desparing and and says crypto
was a libertarian technology and uh AI
was an intrinsically status technology.
But I think that that was really before
LLMs, you know, and that's it's hard to
kind of confidently reconstruct this
now, but there was a time pretty
recently
where AI seemed to be a lot about things
like visual recognition,
um, surveillance systems of those of
those kinds. Um, that China seemed to be
very very aigned
with artificial intelligence. I mean it
was very easy to imagine it it might not
have been strictly the case that that
China was ahead in AI but they seem to
their their social model and the kind of
uses of AI that were in play seemed to
be very compatible. Um and that
definitely I I think led Peter Teal to
to his pessimistic take about it. Um but
I think LLMs have completely broken
that. Um and because
uh you know because China has this great
firewall, I mean it it tries to control
the public dissemination of information
uh with what it considers like in a
responsible fashion as far as it's
concerned. Um and LLMs are not good news
for that at all. Um, like we have our
relatively like an amusing issues to do
with breakouts and trying to get AIS to
be well behaved and polite and not have
bad thoughts, but it's nothing compared
to what the the Chinese situation.
Um,
so
I think LLMs have repolarized things a
little bit in a western direction and I
would say also in a liberal direction.
But again, as I say,
that could be wishful
thinking. And when I say liberal, I
don't mean American liberal. I mean real
liberal. Um towards decentralization.
Um because as you say, they allow
I mean
access to quite high level LLM models is
very thoroughly distributed right now.
you know, if a a company doesn't have to
be big to get have basically the cutting
edge
models to use. So
that certainly doesn't seem to be
playing towards concentration.
I mean, it's like if if that if we're
seeing something that's a kind of a
tendency that's going to be prolonged,
then it's the case that
powerful
AI models are going to be sort of
massively distributed and allow very
small entities, business entities or or
whatever to use them um and therefore
not require
these large managerial real structures
maybe also if I'm getting really
optimistic now but maybe use them as you
were saying about rudarounds you know
like sort of bureaucratic compliance is
obviously like a huge
um motor towards bureaucratization and
and and upscaling of of business
operations and and so if you've got some
way of just uh meeting those this
massive bureaucratic regulatory demands
uh at a small scale. That is that is
something that allows you to to escape
from that and to and to realize a much
more decentralized
um economic process. So yeah, I would
say optimistic but realizing that maybe
I'm just being optimistic.
What about the other part of that
equation which I think is often seen as
Bitcoin? Uh it's something that we
obviously continues to gain interest. Uh
but it still is pretty much just a store
of value. We don't actually seeing it
used as a currency on any kind of
regular basis and I haven't seen really
a lot of advancement in that uh
direction. Do do you think that movement
is going to continue to grow? Do you
think it's going to centralize Bitcoin
or is it is it other uh you know uh
currencies electronic currencies might
uh overtake it or become uh compete with
it? Uh what do you think about the the
advancements in the Bitcoin area? Well,
I mean
just leaving aside the AI question
because obviously I think ultimately the
the fusion of these things is what we
really need to be thinking about but
just keep it segregating them
momentarily.
I think it was already the case that
um
it seemed to make sense for Bitcoin to
function as a store of value that would
be
supporting
um or you providing the kind of trove
for much more
retail friendly
uh a plethora of much more like retail
friendly
Um, cryptos probably much lower
security. Um, you know, you wouldn't
necessarily want to have large sums of
money in them for a long time, but much
more convenient to use. And then you
just like keep switching back into
Bitcoin when you're actually wanting to
preserve and protect
uh wealth. uh and if you're wanting to
use it as kind of circulating money, you
you flip it back into into some other
into some other currency. Um and I think
there's lots of potential for that. It
means that you you don't need all the
innovation to be happening in the in the
Bitcoin core for the whole ecology to to
kind of move forward in an interesting
way.
Um but I think the deal the really kind
of breakthrough thing is going to be
that AI's
using cryptos themselves
you know resourcing their activities
through becoming
uh trading agents in cryptocurrencies
is going to become the
uh the mainstream
usage of cryto cryptos ultimately I mean
I think it's like they're it's it's not
going to people find them extremely
cumbersome and it's difficult for us you
know I think I think relatively advanced
AI specialized you know with a
particular kind of modular competence in
this area that's not going to be a
problem for them and so the so there's a
question of like the maybe Bitcoin looks
retrospectively from the near future as
as a kind of resource
that is put online for AI to actually be
able to engage in autonomous agent
economic behavior
um and co-eol so crypto and AI would in
that case co-evolve
a currency for robots is uh something
else that I can be uh terrified of in
the future. Yeah, that's good. Um, so,
uh, one of the one of the things that
you, uh, wrote about recently that I
kind of noticed was, uh, your discussion
on, uh, the cannon, the English cannon
and and its importance and its
preservation and how, uh, disturbed you
were that people would go back and mess
with it and try to rewrite it and these
things. And I just thought that was
interesting because in some ways it
seems somewhat opposite to uh, kind of
your, you know, nothing human makes it
out of the near future. you know, we're
just going to transcend humanity and and
these kind of things. It seemed actually
much more interested in holding on to
the human. I I just didn't know if you
wanted to talk a little bit about why
you thought that important and if that
has shifted any of your thinking uh at
all. Yeah. Well, I mean,
um yeah, I was trying to think of what's
the best way to
really get at this. I mean I think um
the the Anglo tradition as far as I'm
concerned is like it's real takeoff
is happens in the 17th century you know
I mean you get okay you get Elizabeth in
England and or whatever and then you're
into the 17th century and the 17th
century is characterized
by
an absolutely amazing dynamic tension
between two things that can't really be
convincingly integrated and yet are held
together and mutually kind of work on
each other and um
this is captured by you know in one
person by a figure like Isaac Newton who
I mean it's you on one hand he's like
obviously the the you know father of
modern science in some ways. Um um he's
he's kind of in charge of the mint. Um
he and on the other hand
the vast bulk of his work is like
studying the specifications of the
temple of Solomon and these biblical
um problems as he sees them that as far
as he's concerned deserve no less and in
fact substantially more of his
intellectual attention than than the
things that he's sort of the modern
world
celebrates him for
um
and
I don't think that this tension is
something
that
anyone really moves beyond except in an
illusory
sense. I mean I think the cultural
questions, the religious questions,
the questions about language of of of of
the your ethnic identity as a compound
of these things, you know, those things
are never just like uh evaporated
into technoscience and economic
development or it's like if people think
that happens, that's a kind of illusory
state. Um,
and
you know, I think we can even see in
something I think this LLMs, the fact
that AI, as we kind of get to this brink
of of what is widely seen as being the
final push into artificial intelligence,
it's about language competence. It's and
it's not only about language competence,
but it's about
it's about the archive and it's about
actual
canonicity. It's about the it's as uh
Ro said in a in a recent podcast. It's
like you couldn't have modern AI as we
know on Sunday as LLMs without the
internet.
you know the the notion of someone
actually telling them what they should
know put you know typing that in is so
absurd. It's like the breakthrough is
you is you let these things loose on the
internet and you say just absorb a list
you know this is what this is your
knowledge base and that is the culture
you know ever since the 1990s we've been
putting everything onto the internet or
our whole you know all our libraries all
our archive all our traditional books
you know our scriptures our literature
it's all gone onto the internet and it's
Now AI is now absorbing all of that. Um,
and as it does that, it's kind of
realizing these
technoscientific and economic goals, but
it's also
um this deep nemonic retrieval of of the
culture.
Um,
and so I think we're being pulled in
both of those directions by by this. I
don't think it's just like the AI thing
is taking us away even further from that
notion of what the cultural tradition
is. I think it's the actual dynamic
process is quite different to that.
I've noticed that uh you've talked a lot
about uh the lofty powers directing Elon
Musk or or Trump sending messages these
type of things. Uh more talk about
providence here recently. I was just
wondering is that uh when you're talking
about that are you referencing you know
the lemurs or whatever you're talk
whatever you're communicating with with
the numogram or are you talking about
something a more traditionally uh you
know Abrahamic type of lofty power?
Well, I think the Abrahamic tradition
is our religious culture, you know, and
so I don't think
the these notions that you can just like
break off from that and be somewhere
else or you can go back, you can just
revive paganism or all of that seems to
me
very deluded. Um so I think you know I
am not the most orthodox
member of any particular theological
strand within that tradition but that is
the tradition. I mean I'm not at all
pretending if you're not in relation to
that you're nowhere. you know, maybe you
can find another rich tradition, but but
the human brain, unlike an LLM, the
human brain can't just be put in another
culture and just soak it up like soak up
the the ch Japanese internet or the
Chinese internet or the vadic internet.
I mean, that's not what happens. you
know you you are deeply embedded in a
particular cultural tradition that is
your cultural tradition and that's
something that you have to work with I
think um
so
uh you know I just I think
that language is just to be part in some
way part of conversations
that belong to our cultural tradition. I
think it's like it doesn't require
from my point of view doesn't require a
strong set of um belief commitments. I
mean I respect the fact that that's what
it means for other people but it does
require acknowledgement of the of the
authority
of the traditional culture and that's
what you know our great works of
scripture and literature are what they
are.
I've been trying to properly wrap my
brain about around kind of your
conception of how time works. And I I
think I've got about half of it down,
but one thing I've heard you say uh
repeatedly as just kind of a throwaway
comment that always uh my you know, my
brain gets stuck on is uh you know, we
think of the future proceeding out of
the present, but that can't possibly be
true. Um, and I was just wondering if
you could expound on that a little bit
because every time I hear for some
reason reason, every time I hear that
phrase uh casually thrown by you, it
just uh my brain stops working on that
one. So, why is it this uh relatively
obvious intuition that the future would
come out of the present? Why is that
false? Why is that wrong?
Well, I think that the the uh
the the exact uh comment is probably
that time doesn't come out of the past.
Okay. Um
so I think that you can approach this. I
mean my my root this was through
uh the history of transcendental
philosophy you know starting with
Emanuel Kant. Um but I think you can do
it as P in a way no doubt Kant himself
does you know out of the theological
tradition you know the relation
of
um time and eternity and just try to be
kind of cogent on on that because
because obviously like
um
well let me see if I and just advance on
this thing.
The fact that there is a past at all or
or in fact we you know predict a future
and we consider ourselves the present.
We're assuming
uh the existence of time.
So time time is is not delivered to us
out of the past at all. the fact rather
we we think there is a past because time
is structuring
our experience of the world. Um now I'm
not making a kind of idealistic
commitment. I'm not saying time is
nothing but the way we we see things.
All I'm just simply wanting to say that
um
time as such
cannot be
uh
cannot be produced by history or
certainly not produced by history in any
in any way that wouldn't seem extremely
strange. and philosophically
challenging.
Oh,
sorry I'm glitching out. Oh, no. It's
okay. I just want to talk over you. Yes.
Yeah, I've got you. I I think we got
most of that. You You only stuttered
there for a second. Yes. So So
I think you know there's a lot of
theological
discussion that is really exactly on
this. It's like the whole the whole
questions that you actually get in in at
least the Catholic Church. I I I would
have to just assume Eastern Orthodoxy. I
don't know so much about that. Um
notoriously in certain Protestant
traditions in Calvinism to do with um
questions of predestination and divine
omniscience in relation to time. The
notion of prophecy, you know, the the
notion that uh events have been
pre-ordained
is, I think, the same bundle of
questions, you know, but not conceived
in a in a philosophical language, but in
a in a religious language like um
you know, God
in a traditional sort of western
theological framework is not waiting to
see what happens.
in the future, right?
So, I mean, God, nothing is going to be
nothing is going to surprise God. Um,
nothing is going to surprise eternity if
you're more liberal about what that
involves. Um
and so therefore in so far as we have
any kind of religious communication, if
we if we have any kind of involvement in
the in the eternal realm at all,
then we too cannot simply be
uh
situated in a relation to the future
that is one of just
anticipating it from its past. It's not
possible. I mean, you know, the any
relation to the eternal puts you in a
relation where the whole of time is
simultaneous
and from the perspective of eternity
complete. Um,
and of course, you know, there is it's
not like this is not something that has
been talked about a lot. Um,
so yes, I I mean I think that the latent
traditions of apocalyptic religion, it's
like maybe people stop taking it
seriously and that's why they stop
taking this question seriously. But I
mean like what is the book of
revelation? The book of revelation is um
is written is in some sense supposed to
be written and composed out of eternity
and is a model of scripture in general
like that um and therefore is able to be
prophetic and is not
simply waiting to see what happens. you
know, it doesn't have a relation to
time. That would mean it's in the
position of just waiting to see how
things unfold in time because it's not
coming
uh it's not coming out of the past and
waiting for the future. I don't know
whether any of that is at all. No, no,
that's that's helpful. Yeah. No, it's uh
a lot to process there, but uh but but
helpful for sure. Um I wanted to ask you
uh quickly uh was thinking about this a
little more with patchwork. Uh one of
the key points of patchwork is the
mobility of the citizens, right? They
can move in between they can choose a
different patch as as they as they wish.
Um and I just wondering you especially
thinking about what's happening in uh in
Los Angeles right now. Uh is this
ultimately a a liability for patchwork?
Obviously, it gets the the state the the
micro state would get to choose who
comes in and out as well. So, they could
control this uh to some extent. They can
they can choose who they went in.
They're probably not going to select a
large number of people who are going to
be phased out by AI and these type of
things. But ultimately there does seem
to be a uh a a degradation of the human
quality of life by being constantly
mobile and by not having roots, not
having community, not having these uh
established uh traditions uh being set
down in one place. And I'm just
wondering if while the uh mobility of
human capital might seem uh like a
positive for these systems, if
ultimately it wouldn't degrade uh the
lives of the people who are moving
between these patches because while they
might be chasing better economic
opportunity or better management inside
any given patch, uh won't they
ultimately be breaking down the
community and the bonds that kind of
make them uh live fulfilling and
meaningful lives and therefore they
won't be as useful as human capital to
any given patch.
Um,
I mean this is obviously like a a was
one of the big conversations I think
within the kind of new erectionary
period and it's probably it's a
conversation I guess that that's been
very widespread throughout
you know large sways of of of history.
Um, and I guess it's a kind of like it
can be framed as a kind of critique of
liberalism. Um, liberalism does tend to
basically
favor the kind of mobile, drastinated,
rational
um, self-interested individual. Um and
uh you know obviously people with more
traditional commitments have seen that
as being a huge problem and and in so
far as those ideas have been able to
probably
you know I think anyone would probably
agree being able to radiate themselves
across the whole social space. So, so
that you know people with in search of a
more kind of traditional embedded sort
of deeply meshed social existence
have felt under siege from from it, you
know, and feeling that we're under
attack that that that there is this kind
of attempt to transform them into kind
of homoeconomicus, you know, and to
transform them into the liberal for the
liberal being.
Um,
and I I mean I guess my position on that
is like I really think
in a awful lot of these analogous
problems,
the ideal solution, however it could be
realized, is actual genuine
diversity. You know, I think that it
should be that
people can live like the Amish
and they can live like sort of globe
trotting
economic optimizers, you know, in these
little Hong Kong and Singapore type
dynamic city states. And
the world is a richer place if those two
things
exist. You know, I I I would be sad to
see either of them
completely
extrapated and I and I understand,
you know, why the traditionalist side
would feel that they've had a bad
few centuries and that more
needs to be put into kind of fortifying
that side of the option space. Um
but I think
big big global cities are are not going
to go away. So I mean people who want to
live in
Tokyo or Shanghai or or New York, you
know, those places have to have to be
there. Uh, I don't see them going away
and I don't see them sort of
restoring themselves to some more
established mode of social organization.
I think that we're going to see,
you know, the same kind of very highly
individualized mobile people being the
dwellers in those cosmopolitan cities.
I I just wonder if it's a inherent
problem. You know, you you talked about
uh IQ shredders and the problem of, you
know, just not not reproducing high IQ
people, not reproducing uh and not uh
not improving the the species in that
way. Uh and that being a a real problem
for the NRX model ultimately because you
are creating the scenario where you are
slowly degrading your human capital uh
by by uh having that model. And I just
wondered if the mobility issue was
another instance of this where it's it's
inherently a problem for the model
because it will, you know, even if
you're just looking at an economic
optimization model, you will be breaking
down your human capital uh and you will
be creating a a lack of social cohesion
that uh while you know even the most
liberal people do need at some level to
operate. And so that that was just my
thought is whether this is kind of a a
built-in problem for that uh for that
system.
Well, I mean, I think there is a problem
for sure, but it tends to be now, I
think, swallowed up into this much
larger
problem of just planetary fertility
collapse.
Um
that obviously is rolling in from
the most kind of um
the most sophisticated and civilized
societies on the planet are the ones
that are just seeing
birth rates collapse to to a degree
that's almost incomprehensible. you know
like where the East Asian societies
uh which
you know I certainly find in lots of
ways very attractive places and they
very you know impressive in their level
of civility and um you know
if if there's some kind of competition
for like civilized life I think they do
extremely well but they are at the
cutting edge of this process of just
like almost a voluntary extinction
movement like I think all of them are
around if not lower than
a TFR of one you know I having every
generation.
So that's such a
calamitous situation if it's if you're
able to roll it forward that
I think it's leaving people a little bit
uh just disoriented. I mean, the sheer
craziness of it, um, it's it's really
like
the world is now dependent
on some other apocalypse to swallow us
before this apocalypse annihilates us as
a species. I mean, it's like we actually
the only hope is for something
completely
massive to just swallow up the whole
thing and turn it into something else.
And and of course some people think
maybe AI is this. Maybe I AI, you know,
I was talking to people just the other
night about like are we the pandas that,
you know, AI is going to come to the
rescue and like force us to breed, you
know, like um we're we're all kind of
just blundering our way into extinction
and and something else has to like take
over us and like you're clearly
incompetent as a as a species to deal
with your own reproduction. I don't
know. AI is going to take away our
smartphones and make us sit in a room
with each other until we have sex.
That's kind of a
I mean, there's lots of models. They're
not all that nice, I guess. But yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. Sorry. Go ahead. No, no, no.
I'm I'm waiting for you. Yeah. Oh, I was
just going to say, um, do you think that
this is ultimately a a a spiritual
problem or like a resource problem? Like
eventually, will we just have enough
technology where the working woman can
put the baby in, you know, put the
embryo in the machine that births it and
she can just go to her her work every
day and that will solve the problem? Or
is this ultimately just a species or
different cultures that no longer want
to exist and and have a a spiritual
malaise that is just keeping them from
producing no matter what the resources
available to them would be. I mean I I'm
honestly very non-dogmatic on on this
question. I mean I saw someone making
the case that is not unpersuasive to me
that
you know human reproduction is a is an
evolutionary hack in the sense that we
it's not been necessary
to provide people with an actual
reproduction instinct. that sexual
instinct has is quite satisfactory to
get animals to reproduce
under under natural circumstances. And
so the mere fact that we have
technologically and you know socially
and technologically been able to
decouple sexuality from reproduction
just leads straight into this problem.
That that was the argument. you don't
need any other complicated
explanation for it. Um,
now you know, as I say, I don't want to
dogmatically say that's all there is to
it. Um,
but if that was the case,
uh, then what what are we talking? Is
that is that a spiritual problem or a
technological problem or I mean, I'm not
really quite sure. Um, I'd say it's a
spiritual problem bought brought on by a
technological solution actually.
Uh,
I mean the problem
again maybe look I mean you might think
I'm just being too funy Darwinist about
it but but the but the problem strictly
is
in those terms is just this thing that
that human reproduction is an
evolutionary hack. like we just don't
have
uh a kind of um any kind of reproductive
instincts. Um there's just that that's
not there. And so some people obviously
expect
uh that that there is an evolutionary
answer to that that whatever slight
disposition leads people to reproduce
under modern conditions will kind of
sweep through the gene pool of all these
different populations. And you know,
we're seeing over the course of
generations that
a kind of a modified human psychology
will emerge that is more compatible with
with um population
uh sustaining human population. But it
seems to me like whatever there might be
all kinds of problems and objections one
can have to that. But one of them is the
the time scale just doesn't seem to
square with the other things that are
going on. So it's like I don't think
I have the same problem with people
getting worried about climate change and
all of these things. Like I don't think
that any problem that we solve in a in a
hundred years time
is
very relevant to us now. I mean, I think
we've we have so much hyperacelerated
process going on that
by the time we're a few decades up the
road, the whole environment will have
completely been transformed and and
therefore any notion we had of solutions
to things will be completely obsolescent
and will they will be being restructured
by this new environment. Um,
so yeah, I mean, but sorry, that's
probably still not answering this this
question. I mean, if it's like if by
saying is it a spiritual question, does
that mean
there's some kind of spiritual solution
to it?
Um, and by a spiritual solution,
you know, something like a religious
revival or something
along those lines. I'm I'm just trying
to kind of sorry pro probe you here. Oh,
no. Well, I I guess when I said it's a
spiritual problem, I meant I meant more
is this uh a problem of the soul. Is
this is this a a serious uh deep problem
in humanity? Uh or is it just like a
resource the the current uh modern
living just creates this this resource
depravity in a certain area or certain
working requirements that are keeping us
from having children. And eventually
we'll just create a technology uh that
will solve that problem. we'll have, you
know, incubators or, you know, all these
other things that will do the work of
having and raising children for us, uh,
so we can continue to live these modern
lives. Or even if we had those
technological solutions, would people
still choose not to have children simply
because they've they've got this uh, you
know, this spiritual issue, this this
human uh, human issue that ultimately
seems to be driving them towards ending
their civilization, their existence,
these things. Yeah, I mean, I think
that's a good question. As I say, I'm
radically nondogmatic about it. I, you
know, there's a whole bunch of very
interesting
science fiction to be written on on all
of this. Um,
sorry. I was just like, uh,
I Yeah, I think that I mean a big
problem of this, it tends to be I is
that obviously
the value of children is something that
tends because again of the way we're put
together to be like retrospective. I
mean I don't know whether this is very
sex differentiated you know but um you
can see the problem getting really bad
because it tends to be when people don't
have children they don't at all get why
they would want them and obviously
once people have children it's like oh
the most obvious thing in the world and
obviously like nothing matters other
than this but that whole way of looking
at things is just completely invisible
from the other side of the from the
other side of the line. So
yeah, I mean I don't know whether that
there's anything there that would point
at what might be a solution. I mean
again it's like eventually natural
selection has to tinker with our our
brains if it was left to if that if all
that was happening in history was this
problem then you could just a kind of
there has to be a kind of fairly
straightforward Darwinian solution to
it. But unfortunately it's something
that's happening in this epoch of just
compressed insane change. Um and so
I think those kind of that t that uh
that pace is just not keeping up. You
know, things that require many
generations to to unfold just are a very
kind of bad kind of science fiction.
Now, um
one last thing I want to ask you before
we wrap things up. Alexander Dugan in
his fourth political theory uh has a
very interesting line. He he kind of
comes to accelerationism through his own
uh process. He's talks about delus he
talks about monotonic processes uh and
really reaching this uh moment of
posthuman politics. But at the end of
his acceleration explanation, his uh
final I guess vision is that once you
reach kind of this moment uh of
modernity and postmodernity collapsing
on themselves, what you end up is this
moment where people actually reapproach
the spiritual because it re allows
people to break out of this very rigid
uh and somewhat nihilistic uh obsession
with rationality in modern life and
allows them to return to a place where
they can engage with uh spirituality and
these kind of things. I I I don't know
if you've read any Dugan. I don't know
if you're familiar with any of his work,
but I I didn't know uh if you had any uh
any thoughts on on kind of his his
approach to accelerationism and where he
thinks it might go. Yes. No, I think
he's very interesting. I mean, I I'm not
hugely steeped in his writing, but I've
definitely
looked at some of it. Um,
and
I mean it seems to me it's partly
what I feel about his work is that it's
very Russian, you know, so and and I
think
sort of reciprocally
I would think we would agree on this
thing that we would expect these
positions
uh sort of speculative, political,
philos, phil philosophical, religious
positions to be
deeply ethnically embedded
um much more than has people have been
willing to kind of accept in much of the
recent modern world. And so,
you know,
where I disagree with him is simply
because of the fact that I h I'm coming
from a different place ethnically.
Like I I I kind of completely see like
as a Russian, of course, this is right.
Um, and I but I think that, you know, I
think that the Anglosphere, I think the
Anglo,
wherever you draw the line around that,
have a peculiar
planetary destiny. And I and I think
that Dugan would be the first person to
acknowledge that. And I I think part of
that is that there's
the religious tradition is so tied up
with the ignition
process that I don't really think it's
eextricable.
I don't think that I don't think that
Anglo can return to something that is
not tied up with
liberal teology,
technoscientific
explosion.
Um, all of those topics are sort of
embedded in what
actually constitutes
us as an ethnos. Um, so
there would, you know, on specifics of
this question, you know, my sense of
what Dugan's doing is like it's
definitely interesting, but that's not
us, I think. Interest. That's a
fascinating way to see that. Yeah. The
different cultural DA signs uh going
going different ways uh in in that uh
destiny. That's that's very interesting.
All right. Well, Nick, it's been an
absolute pleasure uh talking with you. I
don't know if you're working on anything
or if there's anything you want to let
people know about a book or or anything
that you'd want to tell uh the audience
about before we leave.
Uh no, I don't I don't think I I need to
I mean um
you know I I've enjoyed this a lot. It's
been great to be here. Um, and uh I I I
I'm sorry if I've been extraordinarily
bad at like hearing your questions and
not
opportunities to wander off at strange
angles, but yeah, that's always the
best. A pleasure.
Yeah, no, no problem there at all. Well,
guys, if if it's your first time on this
channel, please go ahead and subscribe
on YouTube, click the bells and
notifications and everything you need to
catch these episodes when they go live.
Remember, we're not live today, so
unfortunately, if you ask any questions,
we won't be able to answer them. And of
course, if you'd like to get these
broadcasts as podcasts, you need to
subscribe to the Ora McIntyre Show on
your favorite podcast network. Thank you
everybody for watching, and as always,
I'll talk to you next time.